Release 4.2 beta 1 and publish release notes (#728)
godotengine/godot-website: collections/_article/dev-snapshot-godot-4-2-beta-1.md

---
title: "Dev snapshot: Godot 4.2 beta 1"
excerpt: ""
categories: ["pre-release"]
author: Yuri Sizov
image: /storage/blog/covers/dev-snapshot-godot-4-2-beta-1.webp
image_caption_title: Lush Jungle
image_caption_description: A demo scene by Wrobot
date: 2023-10-12 14:00:00
---

Over the course of [the last 3 months](/article/godot-4-1-is-here) **270 contributors** submitted more than **1200 improvements** for the Godot 4.2 release!

Among these changes are both necessary bugfixes and exciting new features, turning Godot 4 into an even better and more polished tool for you to realize your game and app ideas. There are many more improvements to come, but for now we draw the line here and turn our efforts towards stabilizing the engine so it can be released officially at the start of November.

> This means, _it's beta testing time,_ and you are invited to offer your hand in squashing bugs and identifying usability issues. Help us make sure that in Godot 4.2 there are no crashes, unexpected regressions, and performance is no worse (but preferably better) than before. Godot is developed by its community, and it's thanks to people like you we can be sure in the quality of our collective work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means, _it's beta testing time,_ and you are invited to offer your hand in squashing bugs and identifying usability issues. Help us make sure that in Godot 4.2 there are no crashes or unexpected regressions, and that performance is no worse than before. Godot is developed by its community, and it's thanks to people like you we can be sure in the quality of our collective work!
```
Before, it sounded like this was the start of a long list with each item starting with "no", i.e. "Make sure no crashes, no regressions, and no performance..." which suddenly jolts the reader when they realise the performance bit is not part of the "no" list. Also removed the bracketed text as it made the sentence a bit long and seemed unnecessary or distracting. (Gosh, it takes longer to write these explanations than just making the changes!)

Author: I prefer to keep the part in parentheses as a stylistic choice. I'll apply the rest though.

```suggestion
This means, _it's beta testing time,_ and you are invited to offer your hand in squashing bugs and identifying usability issues. Help us make sure that in Godot 4.2 there are no crashes or unexpected regressions, and that performance is no worse (but preferably better) than before. Godot is developed by its community, and it's thanks to people like you we can be sure in the quality of our collective work!
```

Please, consider [supporting the project financially](#support), if you are able. Godot is maintained by the efforts of volunteers and your donations go towards sponsoring their work and ensuring they can dedicate their undivided attention to the needs of the project.

[Jump to the **Downloads** section](#downloads), and give it a spin right now, or continue reading to learn more about improvements in this release. You can also [try the **Web editor**](https://editor.godotengine.org/releases/4.2.beta1/) or the **Android editor** for this release. If you are interested in the latter, please request to join [our testing group](https://groups.google.com/g/godot-testers) to get access to pre-release builds.

-----

> *The illustration picture in this article is taken from the* [**Lush Jungle**](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo), *a Godot 4 demo scene created by [Wrobot](https://wrobot.nl.eu.org/). You can look at their beautify jungle vistas in [this showcase video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MM_caxjlNao), or try the demo for yourself by downloading it from [itch.io](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo). And consider following Wrobot on social networks ([Twitter](https://twitter.com/wrobot123), [Mastodon](https://mastodon.gamedev.place/@Wrobot)) to make sure you don't miss any of their future work!*

Reviewer: Is the Wrobot project actually called "Lush Jungle"? The itch.io page calls it "Jungle Demo", and the Youtube video calls it "Realistic Jungle Demo".

Author: It's indeed called just "Jungle" but they refer to it as lush jungle in the description, which fits better our formatting than just "jungle".

- `GraphEdit` and `GraphNode` nodes are reworked with multiple renames, temporary removal of comment nodes, and introduction of `GraphElement` ([GH-79307](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79307), [GH-79308](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79308), [GH-79311](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79311), [GH-81582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81582)).
- An optimization that required splitting raster barriers into vertex and fragment components changes relevant enumerations ([GH-77420](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77420)). It's unlikely that this affects your project, unless you rely on specific numeric values and store them somewhere.
- Renaming an audio bus no longer emits the `bus_layout_changed` signal in `AudioServer`; use the new `bus_renamed` signal ([GH-81641](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81641)).
- Default base part of the Android package name was changed from `org.godotengine` to `com.example` ([GH-80761](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80761)).

### Core and systems

> Following big changes to resource loading and multithreading done in Godot 4.1, the core team is more focused on stability this time around.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the big changes to resource loading and multithreading done in Godot 4.1, the core team is more focused on stability this time around.
```

> This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. As should not occur sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)). There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. Also, sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)) should no longer occur. There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.
```

> This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. As should not occur sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)). There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. Sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes should also no longer occur ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)). There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.
```
Made it an actual sentence.

Author: Going with Clay's suggestion.

Reviewer: Yep, he beat me to it and his wording is better :)

These issues were fixed thanks to submissions from veteran contributors, such as [Pedro J. Estébanez](https://github.com/RandomShaper), [RedworkDE](https://github.com/RedworkDE), and [Rindbee](https://github.com/Rindbee), as well as project newcomers who only started contributing recently, [OXTyler](https://github.com/OXTyler) and [Jordyfel](https://github.com/Jordyfel).

> Sometimes a small mistake can result in major and unexpected differences in behavior. Such is the bug that has been well spotted and fixed by the project's bugsquad powerhouse [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips) ([GH-81037](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81037)). This issue has been causing abnormal memory usage and performance issues in seemingly trivial use cases. If you are using a lot of plain Godot objects, you should clearly see the difference in 4.2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes a small mistake can result in major and unexpected differences in behavior. Such is the case with this bug that was spotted and fixed by the project's bugsquad powerhouse [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips) ([GH-81037](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81037)). This issue caused abnormal memory usage and performance issues in seemingly trivial use cases. If you are using a lot of plain Godot objects, you should see a noticeable decrease in memory usage in 4.2.
```

Smaller but notable feature additions have made their way into the release as well. You can now load OGG files at runtime, from a buffer or from a file path ([GH-78084](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78084) by [K. S. Ernest Lee](https://github.com/fire)). Same goes for SVG files, which can be loaded from a binary buffer or a string ([GH-78248](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78248) by [Felipe Augusto Marques](https://github.com/felaugmar)).

![GodSVG is an SVG editor app made with Godot 4 by MewPurPur](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/svg-editor-by-mewpurpur.webp)

_[GodSVG](https://github.com/MewPurPur/GodSVG) is an SVG editor app made with Godot 4 by [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur)._

### 2D and 3D features

> Godot is a general purpose game engine, and features a variety of components aimed at helping you develop both 2D and 3D games. While not necessarily core, they are an integral part of the engine and thus get love an attention all the same in every release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Godot is a general purpose game engine, and features a variety of components aimed at helping you develop both 2D and 3D games. While not necessarily core, they are an integral part of the engine and thus get love and attention all the same in every release.
```
Are the 2D and 3D components not "core"?

Author: This split allows for more focused and balanced sections.

> If you are developing 2D games, two new features deserve your attention. First of all, [Riteo](https://github.com/Riteo) takes a break from working on Wayland support (coming soon!) and implements forced integer scaling ([GH-75784](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75784)). Enabled with a project setting integer scaling ensures that no matter the aspect ratio you get a square pixel grid without distortions. Another useful tool under your belt is the new `closed` property for the `Line2D` nodes, which allows you to draw enclosed lines with uninterrupted visuals ([GH-79182](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79182) by [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are developing 2D games, two new features deserve your attention. First of all, [Riteo](https://github.com/Riteo) took a break from working on Wayland support (coming soon!) and implemented forced integer scaling ([GH-75784](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75784)). Enabled with a project setting, integer scaling ensures that no matter the aspect ratio you get a square pixel grid without distortions. Another useful tool under your belt is the new `closed` property for `Line2D` nodes, which allows you to draw enclosed lines with uninterrupted visuals ([GH-79182](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79182) by [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur)).
```

For projects that require precise normals from contact points of raycasts, the ability to get barycentric coordinates is going to be invaluable ([GH-71233](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/71233)). Whether you want to make an F-Zero-like game, or implement gravity-defying walks on walls, you can thank [PrecisionRender](https://github.com/PrecisionRender) for this new feature. And to help you handle rotation and angles correctly there are now two new global methods, `rotate_toward` and `angle_difference`, courtesy of [etti](https://github.com/ettiSurreal) ([GH-80225](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80225)).

#### Animations

> The animation team is hard at work improving robustness of the animation system, and their biggest contribution to this release by far is an internal rework of both `AnimationPlayer` and `AnimationTree`, unifying parts of their implementation under the new `AnimationMixer` node ([GH-80813](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80813)). This change allows them to address a large number of issues and discrepancies between the two nodes. And I think [Tokage](https://github.com/TokageItLab) has snuck in a feature or two with it as well!

Reviewer: Would be nice to be a bit more specific about the "feature or two", or just not mention it at all, rather than this sneaky mention.

#### Navigation

Exciting additions have been cooking in the navigation system of the engine by Godot's resident navigation maintainer [smix8](https://github.com/smix8). At the top of the list is navigation mesh baking for 2D, bringing it to parity with 3D navigation ([GH-80796](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80796)). It is capable of handling physics bodies, mesh instances, plain polygons, and, of course, tilemaps ([GH-82465](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82465)).

On top of that, both 2D and 3D navigation servers now support multi-threading when baking the navigation mesh ([GH-79972](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79972)), removing stutters and bringing performance to a whole new level.

#### Tilemaps

> One of the areas that receive most feedback is the tiles/tilemap system and editor. And so improvements to them in Godot 4.2 are plentiful, targeting both usability and performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the areas that receives most feedback is the tiles/tilemap system and editor. And so improvements to them in Godot 4.2 are plentiful, targeting both usability and performance.
```

> Let's start with [Gilles Roudière](https://github.com/groud) who has laid a lot of ground work for future improvements with an internal refactoring ([GH-78328](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78328)) earlier this year. This has been followed by two major performance optimizations, cutting down update times multiple times over — thanks to smart tile grouping using quadrants ([GH-81070](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81070)) and Y-sorting upgrade ([GH-73813](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/73813)), as well as other optimizations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's start with [Gilles Roudière](https://github.com/groud) who has laid a lot of ground work for future improvements with an internal refactoring ([GH-78328](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78328)) earlier this year. This has been followed by two major performance optimizations, cutting down update times multiple times over — thanks to smart tile grouping using quadrants ([GH-81070](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81070)) and a Y-sorting upgrade ([GH-73813](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/73813)), as well as other optimizations.
```

> Impressive as that is, it might just be overshadowed by the shear number of usability improvements to the creation and utilization of tilemaps contributed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). Probably the most notable addition in this release is the new tool which allows you to flip and rotate any tile or tile pattern when placing them in the world ([GH-80144](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80144)). And then the list continues with improvements to scene tiles, polygon editing, various hints and tips that direct users, and so on and so forth ([GH-77986](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77986), [GH-79285](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79285), [GH-79512](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79512), [GH-79676](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79676), [GH-79899](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79899), [GH-79904](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79904), [GH-80754](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80754), ...).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Impressive as that is, it might just be overshadowed by the shear number of usability improvements to the creation and utilization of tilemaps contributed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). Probably the most notable addition in this release is the new tool which allows you to flip and rotate any tile or tile pattern when placing them in the world ([GH-80144](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80144)). The list continues with improvements to scene tiles, polygon editing, various hints and tips that direct users, and so on and so forth ([GH-77986](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77986), [GH-79285](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79285), [GH-79512](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79512), [GH-79676](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79676), [GH-79899](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79899), [GH-79904](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79904), [GH-80754](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80754), ...).
```

Author: Any particular reason for that?

Reviewer: Having *both* "And" and "then" seemed redundant. I considered suggesting changing to either "And the list continues with" or "Then the list continues with", but actually thought it was sounded better without either of them! If you don't like it without both, "And the list continues with" would be my second-choice recommendation.

Author: ```suggestion
Impressive as that is, it might just be overshadowed by the shear number of usability improvements to the creation and utilization of tilemaps contributed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). Probably the most notable addition in this release is the new tool which allows you to flip and rotate any tile or tile pattern when placing them in the world ([GH-80144](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80144)). And the list continues with improvements to scene tiles, polygon editing, various hints and tips that direct users, and so on and so forth ([GH-77986](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77986), [GH-79285](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79285), [GH-79512](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79512), [GH-79676](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79676), [GH-79899](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79899), [GH-79904](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79904), [GH-80754](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80754), ...).
```

A dedicated shoutout to [Rakka Rage](https://github.com/rakkarage) who has been fixing up the tilemap editor since Godot 4.1, and [Thiago Lages de Alencar](https://github.com/thiagola92) who fixed their first bug in this release. They are among many more people making the engine better one contribution at a time ([GH-77316](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77316), [GH-79678](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79678), [GH-80943](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80943), [GH-80968](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80968)).

### Editor and usability

> With every Godot release there are always a few hundred changes aimed at improving user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each Godot release has a few hundred changes aimed at improving the user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible.
```
Having both "every" and "always" seemed redundant. I've also simplified the sentence a little.

Alternatively, could have "With every Godot release there are a few hundred changes aimed at improving the user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible."

Author: Redundancy itself is not a problem it it's used on purpose. In this case, that's how my speech is structured, this is used with intent. Your initial suggestion turns the voice of the article very dry, and we want to inspire and excite, and share accomplishments. I don't mind dropping "always", as your second suggestion proposes, but I wanted to mention that this is not supposed to be a dry document and a bit of color is added there on purpose.

Author: ```suggestion
With every Godot release there are a few hundred changes aimed at improving user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible.
```

With many changes to cover, it's hard to pick the most impactful ones, because it's the sum of all the work that ensures you are happy to open the editor every day. The next few subsections try their best to highlight in broad strokes all the amazing work being done on the editor.

But before we go into more specific changes in various editor areas, an honorable mention goes to [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) who has been tirelessly working on adding missing icons and optimizing existing ones ([GH-78858](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78858), [GH-78903](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78903), [GH-79431](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79431), [GH-80102](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80102), [GH-80103](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80103), [GH-80113](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80113), [GH-80129](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80129), and many more).

#### Code editor

> We can start with the code editor, which now supports code regions (for GDScript), allowing you to break up scripts into named blocks, foldable and easy to navigate, without affecting the flow of the program ([GH-74843](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/74843) by [Jean-Michel Bernard](https://github.com/jmb462)). The logic behind commenting out parts of your code also becomes more predictable with improvements to the toggle comments behavior by [Michał Iwańczuk](https://github.com/iwek7) ([GH-44557](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/44557)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code editor now supports code regions for GDScript, allowing you to break up scripts into named blocks. These blocks are foldable and easy to navigate, without affecting the flow of the program ([GH-74843](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/74843) by [Jean-Michel Bernard](https://github.com/jmb462)). The logic behind commenting out parts of your code also becomes more predictable with improvements to the toggle comments behavior by [Michał Iwańczuk](https://github.com/iwek7) ([GH-44557](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/44557)).
```
Split first long sentence into two shorter ones. Also removed "we can" - that sounds a little undecided. Just say what you want to say! (I do understand it's a way of indicating that all the following changes are equally important and that you just happen to start with the code editor).

Author: I'll drop the "can" but keep the general structure. I'm also going to break it up differently, because the last clause relates to the first part of the sentence, not to the "foldable and easy to navigate" part.

#### 3D viewport and tools

> In Godot 4.0 [Ryan Roden-Corrent](https://github.com/rcorre) added convenient hotkeys to the 3D viewport which any Blender user would find familiar. Blender-style transforms, using keys like `G`, `R`, or `S`, are now improved with support for numeric inputs for each operation and mouse wrapping ([GH-58389](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/58389), [GH-59467](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/59467)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Godot 4.0 [Ryan Roden-Corrent](https://github.com/rcorre) added convenient hotkeys to the 3D viewport which any Blender user would find familiar. Blender-style transforms, using keys like `G`, `R`, or `S`, are now improved with support for numeric inputs for each operation, and mouse wrapping ([GH-58389](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/58389), [GH-59467](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/59467)).
```

> If you rely more on on-screen gizmos, you will love from this next feature developed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). As you probably know, box collision shapes are defined as a center point and symmetrical extents, which long has limited how they can be edited. But no longer, as each side can now be extended individually within the editor viewport.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you rely more on on-screen gizmos, you will love this next feature developed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). As you probably know, box collision shapes are defined as a center point and symmetrical extents, which has long limited how they can be edited. But no longer, as each side can now be extended individually within the editor viewport.
```

While in the 3D viewport, you may notice that it contains less clutter as various auxiliary visual information is only displayed for selected objects ([GH-75303](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75303)). At the same time elements like decals and fog volumes now have extra indicators which make them easier to select via the viewport ([GH-81554](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81554)). Both of these changes were submitted by [Hugo Locurcio](https://github.com/Calinou).

#### Docks and resource editors

> A lot of love was poured into the inspector and signal docks by [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev), with improvements to context menus and on-hover documentation for types and their properties ([GH-80411](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80411), [GH-81092](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81092), [GH-81221](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81221)). Property descriptions are also now available in the theme editor ([GH-81284](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81284) by [Michael Alexsander](https://github.com/YeldhamDev)). The filesystem dock didn't want to feel left behind, so it received a highly requested organizational feature. You can now assign colors to various folders to help you navigate your project more intuitively, thanks to [Lucian](https://github.com/the-sink) ([GH-80440](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80440))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of love was poured into the inspector and signal docks by [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev), with improvements to context menus and on-hover documentation for types and their properties ([GH-80411](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80411), [GH-81092](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81092), [GH-81221](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81221)). Property descriptions are also now available in the theme editor ([GH-81284](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81284) by [Michael Alexsander](https://github.com/YeldhamDev)). The filesystem dock didn't want to feel left behind, so it received a highly requested organizational feature. You can now assign colors to various folders to help you navigate your project more intuitively, thanks to [Lucian](https://github.com/the-sink) ([GH-80440](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80440)).
```

To close things off, myself, [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov), has worked out several annoyances and issues in the texture region editor, making sure it works consistently with all supported resources, such as styleboxes and atlases ([GH-80435](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80435)).

#### Asset library

A couple of useful changes made their way into the AssetLib tab. Now, as you install an addon or an asset, be it from a file or from the search results, you can specify a different installation folder and also choose to skip the root folder in the asset archive typically generated by GitHub ([GH-81358](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81358), [GH-81620](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81620) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)).

The search results themselves have been improved, solving a problem with overflowing content and adjusting navigation buttons ([GH-80555](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80555) by [Dalton Lang](https://github.com/GrammAcc)).

#### Project manager

> The project manager is the first thing that users see when they begin their Godot journey, and as such it is both in a constant need to be improved and must be treated with carefully. As a result of that dilemma, the work submitted by [starry-abyss](https://github.com/starry-abyss) two years ago only now becomes available with the upcoming release of Godot 4.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The project manager is the first thing that users see when they begin their Godot journey, and as such it is both in a constant need to be improved and must be treated with care. As a result of that dilemma, the work submitted by [starry-abyss](https://github.com/starry-abyss) two years ago only now becomes available with the upcoming release of Godot 4.2.
```
Or "treated carefully".

They've looked into the UX of the project manager and decided to improve the general arrangement of key controls, as well as the project import workflow ([GH-50674](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/50674), [GH-51478](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/51478)). Make sure to give us your feedback on these changes!

#### Editor plugins

> In more technical news, editor-specific scripting API, relevant for plugins and tool scripts, has seen a few changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In more technical news, the editor-specific scripting API, relevant for plugins and tool scripts, has seen a few changes.
```

> A lot of editor functionality is exposed, directly or indirectly, via the `EditorInterface` class. It exists as a single instance, however in previous versions of Godot accessing it involved getting a reference through `EditorPlugin` or `EditorScript`. In case of tool scripts this means using hacks creating useless instances of either class just to get the access. Now, `EditorInterface` is just a singleton, available only in the editor ([GH-75694](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75694) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of editor functionality is exposed, directly or indirectly, via the `EditorInterface` class. It exists as a single instance, however in previous versions of Godot accessing it involved getting a reference through `EditorPlugin` or `EditorScript`. In case of tool scripts this meant using hacks creating useless instances of either class just to get the access. Now, `EditorInterface` is just a singleton, available only in the editor ([GH-75694](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75694) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)).
```

And on that singleton there are now handy methods to get a direct reference to 2D and 3D viewports, thanks to a contribution from [Cory Petkovsek](https://github.com/TokisanGames) ([GH-68696](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/68696)).

Finally, editor plugins can now trigger the warning dialog, prompting the user about unsaved changes when closing the editor ([GH-67503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67503) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)).

### GDExtension

> One of the more powerful Godot features is the GDExtension system, providing framework for low-level engine extensions which don't require being bundled with the engine. This serves multiple purposes, from basic extended functionality and integration with third-party libraries to introduction of additional scripting languages or physics backends. Basically extensions are supposed to do everything that engine modules can, but can be compiled and distributed independently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the more powerful Godot features is the GDExtension system, providing a framework for low-level engine extensions which don't require being bundled with the engine. This serves multiple purposes, from basic extended functionality and integration with third-party libraries, to introduction of additional scripting languages or physics backends. Basically extensions are supposed to do everything that engine modules can, but can be compiled and distributed independently.
```

In other big news, dynamic libraries can now be loaded on the Web platform, which means GDExtensions can be used with web exports ([GH-82633](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82633)). Thanks to [Fabio Alessandrelli](https://github.com/Faless) for his outstanding work!

As a closing treat, which should be most interesting to developers creating scripting languages using extensions, the API dump can now optionally include complete class reference documentation ([GH-82331](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82331) by [Ricardo Buring](https://github.com/rburing)).

### GUI and theming

> The first set of notable changes focuses on... well, on focus management. Thanks to a contribution by [DrRevert](https://github.com/DrRevert) individual tabs of `TabBar`/`TabContainer` can now receive focus, including keyboard navigation and dedicated styling ([GH-79104](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79104)). Speaking of navigation, a new method available for all `Control` nodes allows you to find the next valid focus neighbor in any direction, which is useful when implementing custom traversal logic ([GH-76027](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76027) by [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first set of notable GUI changes focuses on... well, on focus management. Thanks to a contribution by [DrRevert](https://github.com/DrRevert), individual tabs of `TabBar`/`TabContainer` can now receive focus, including keyboard navigation and dedicated styling ([GH-79104](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79104)). Speaking of navigation, a new method available for all `Control` nodes allows you to find the next valid focus neighbor in any direction, which is useful when implementing custom traversal logic ([GH-76027](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76027) by [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips)).
```
I'm not sure if it's just me, but I like to think of headings as skippable - that is, they are used to split up long text into sections, but the body text should still make sense if you skip reading the heading. As such, I've put "GUI" in the first sentence, so it doesn't read jarringly and the reader have to glance upwards to the header.

Author: For such a long article I expect the opposite to happen. Nobody is going to read the whole thing, instead people would jump to sections which they are interested in and so they'll have all the context they need.

> Next up is the big rework of graph-building nodes. Marked as experimental starting with Godot 4.0, `GraphEdit` and `GraphNode` have been cleaned up and reorganized, splitting node functionality into several different type. This allows developers to define completely custom graph nodes without most of the predefined behavior. This rework also made the title bar of each graph node more customizable, while temporarily removing comment nodes which need a little bit more time in the oven.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next up is the big rework of graph-building nodes. Marked as experimental starting with Godot 4.0, `GraphEdit` and `GraphNode` have been cleaned up and reorganized, splitting node functionality into several different types. This allows developers to define completely custom graph nodes without most of the predefined behavior. This rework also made the title bar of each graph node more customizable, while temporarily removing comment nodes which need a little bit more time in the oven.
```

On the theming side of things [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi) provided a fix for the theme editor collapsing when editing its inner resources ([GH-81523](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81523)). This release also contains a number of internal changes paving the road for future improvements related to styling of custom controls. One of the changes brought by these improvements that users can already appreciate is the new ability to preview how your layouts look with the editor theme applied right in the 2D viewport ([GH-81130](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81130) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)). It also fixes issues with the project theme affecting the editor.

### Import and asset pipeline

Godot 4.2 resolves one of the biggest hurdles in the asset importing process — the need to restart the editor whenever you change the import type ([GH-78890](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78890)). Previous design limitations have been resolved by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi), and now import type changes are picked up on the fly with relevant scenes and resources being invalidated and updated appropriately.

> Starting with the version 4.0 the engine features a powerful import pipeline which allows you to granularly configure how each asset is going to be converted to Godot's formats. This release exposes more options and preview features to the advanced import options dialog. A contribution from [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus) adds very handy animation playback ([GH-76367](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76367)) right into the preview window. Another two submissions, this time by [Hannah Crawford](https://github.com/EMBYRDEV), allow users to override physics properties of imported objects, and to configure shadow casting and visibility ranges ([GH-77533](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77533), [GH-78803](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78803)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with version 4.0, the engine features a powerful import pipeline which allows you to granularly configure how each asset is going to be converted to Godot's formats. This release exposes more options and preview features to the advanced import options dialog. A contribution from [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus) adds very handy animation playback ([GH-76367](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76367)) right into the preview window. Another two submissions, this time by [Hannah Crawford](https://github.com/EMBYRDEV), allow users to override physics properties of imported objects, and to configure shadow casting and visibility ranges ([GH-77533](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77533), [GH-78803](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78803)).
```

> GLTF is the main 3D asset format supported by Godot, and it even acts as a backbone for FBX and `.blend` file imports. Because of that, the import team is always dedicating a lot of attention to improving our support of GLTF imports, various extensions, and fixing related bugs. One of the new supported GLTF extensions is `KHR_materials_emissive_strength`, which is responsible for representing Blender's emission multiplier, among other things. [Gordon MacPherson](https://github.com/RevoluPowered) implemented it for imported assets, and [wojtekpil](https://github.com/wojtekpil) then ensured it was also supported when exporting GLTF assets from Godot ([GH-78621](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78621), [GH-79421](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79421)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GLTF is the main 3D asset format supported by Godot, and it even acts as a backbone for FBX and `.blend` file imports. Because of that, the import team always dedicates a lot of attention to improving our support of GLTF imports, various extensions, and fixing related bugs. One of the new supported GLTF extensions is `KHR_materials_emissive_strength`, which is responsible for representing Blender's emission multiplier, among other things. [Gordon MacPherson](https://github.com/RevoluPowered) implemented it for imported assets, and [wojtekpil](https://github.com/wojtekpil) then ensured it was also supported when exporting GLTF assets from Godot ([GH-78621](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78621), [GH-79421](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79421)).
```

Exporting meshes and models from Godot is an important part of some workflows, such as blocking out level geometry in the editor and then enhancing it in modeling software. Which is why [Aaron Franke](https://github.com/aaronfranke) spent time addressing several issues and inconsistencies in the process, as well as fixing other asset pipeline bugs ([GH-79533](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79533), [GH-79623](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79623), [GH-79636](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79636), [GH-79801](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79801)).

One more notable change to the import process is the newly added KTX image format support ([GH-76572](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76572)). This type of image is often used for Basis Universal in GLTF. That was a pretty impressive first contribution for [acazuc](https://github.com/acazuc)!

### Input

> A lot of work is happening behind the scene around Viewport mouse handling. [Markus Sauermann](https://github.com/Sauermann), project's dedicated input maintainer, spent a lot of time making sure mouse and focus event behave predictably across multiple viewports and windows ([GH-67791](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67791) and many follow-ups). This is an area that is very difficult to get right, as every platform and environment has its own gimmicks and compromises. Make sure to report any issues related to mouse behavior that you find!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of work is happening behind the scenes around Viewport mouse handling. [Markus Sauermann](https://github.com/Sauermann), the project's dedicated input maintainer, spent a lot of time making sure mouse and focus events behave predictably across multiple viewports and windows ([GH-67791](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67791) and many follow-ups). This is an area that is very difficult to get right, as every platform and environment has its own gimmicks and compromises. Make sure to report any issues related to mouse behavior that you find!
```

> Godot 4.2 also attempts to resolve two major issues related to gamepads. First of all, contributor [Eoin O'Neill](https://github.com/Eoin-ONeill-Yokai) offers a fix to the Steam Input issue which caused some gamepad events to be handled twice ([GH-76045](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76045)). Second issue relates to an infamous bug affecting actions with multiple input methods assigned to them, such as character movement controlled by WASD and a thumbstick/D-Pad ([GH-80859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80859), [GH-81170](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81170) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Godot 4.2 also attempts to resolve two major issues related to gamepads. First of all, contributor [Eoin O'Neill](https://github.com/Eoin-ONeill-Yokai) offers a fix to the Steam Input issue which caused some gamepad events to be handled twice ([GH-76045](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76045)). The second issue relates to an infamous bug affecting actions with multiple input methods assigned to them, such as character movement controlled by WASD and a thumbstick/D-Pad ([GH-80859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80859), [GH-81170](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81170) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)).
```

Author: Here the credit is not a part of the sentence, it's just a reference to the PR author in the parentheses. I edited your comment so I can apply the rest of the suggestion!

This release also includes a security fix, previously disclosed in the 4.0.4 RC1 blog post. If your project uses `ENetMultiplayerPeer` or the low-level `ENetConnection`, there is a potential denial of service attack that utilizes a flaw in the ENet library. We strongly recommend updating to versions 4.0.4, 4.1.2, and 4.2 (once it is released as stable). Thanks to [Facundo Fernández](https://github.com/Facundo15) for reporting this vulnerability. A patch has been submitted to the upstream ENet repository as well.

These multiplayer changes were contributed by Godot's networking and Web platform maintainer [Fabio Alessandrelli](https://github.com/Faless).

### Porting and platforms

Godot prides itself on first-class support when it comes to porting, including all mainstream desktop platforms, mobile platforms (with some exciting news [coming to C# users](#c--net)), and the Web platform.

> Part of this support includes better integration with the host environment. In this release Godot's porting guru [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg) is adding native file selection dialogs for Linux, macOS, and Windows, allowing you to leverage familiar user interface in your games and apps ([GH-47499](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/47499), [GH-79574](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79574), [GH-80104](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80104)). This feature is especially important for sandboxed apps on macOS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Part of this support includes better integration with the host environment. In this release, Godot's porting guru [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg) has added native file selection dialogs for Linux, macOS, and Windows, allowing you to leverage familiar user interfaces in your games and apps ([GH-47499](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/47499), [GH-79574](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79574), [GH-80104](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80104)). This feature is especially important for sandboxed apps on macOS.
```

Another extremely useful interaction with the operating system is copying and pasting images. Thanks to efforts from [Deakcor](https://github.com/deakcor) this is now implemented for macOS and Windows ([GH-63826](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/63826)), but Linux/X11 should hopefully follow suit soon ([GH-81439](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81439)).

#### Android

> Platform integration is often a compromise allowing you to marry two completely foreign technologies for a seamless experience. Godot's Android platform architecture currently contains one such compromise, being based on the Android Fragment component that significantly limits our control over the Godot application running on that platform. Over the course of several months project's lead Android maintainer [Fredia Huya-Kouadio](https://github.com/m4gr3d) worked tirelessly on refactoring the platform integration to solve this limitation at its core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Platform integration is often a compromise allowing you to marry two completely foreign technologies for a seamless experience. Godot's Android platform architecture currently contains one such compromise, being based on the Android Fragment component that significantly limits our control over the Godot application running on that platform. Over the course of several months, the project's lead Android maintainer [Fredia Huya-Kouadio](https://github.com/m4gr3d) worked tirelessly on refactoring the platform integration to solve this limitation at its core.
```

> New Android platform architecture (introduced by [GH-76821](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76821)) decouples Godot's application from the Android Fragment component, unlocking new features in the process such as multiple windows and quicker startup times for Godot apps and games. As a continuation of this work, the Godot Android plugin framework has been updated as well ([GH-78958](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78958), [GH-80740](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80740), [GH-81368](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81368)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New Android platform architecture (introduced by [GH-76821](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76821)) decouples Godot applications from the Android Fragment component, unlocking new features in the process such as multiple windows and quicker startup times for Godot apps and games. As a continuation of this work, the Godot Android plugin framework has been updated as well ([GH-78958](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78958), [GH-80740](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80740), [GH-81368](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81368)).
```

Author: It's tricky, because in this case it's not talking about applications as a user-facing concept, but about the "Godot application" part of the distribution, as opposed to the boilerplate/platform hooks.

```suggestion
New Android platform architecture (introduced by [GH-76821](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76821)) decouples Godot's application part from the Android Fragment component, unlocking new features in the process such as multiple windows and quicker startup times for Godot apps and games. As a continuation of this work, the Godot Android plugin framework has been updated as well ([GH-78958](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78958), [GH-80740](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80740), [GH-81368](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81368)).
```

Reviewer: Ah thanks, I wasn't sure about that.

Please make sure to test these changes and provide feedback to our Android platform maintainers who want to ensure a smooth migration process. You can refer to the [updated platform documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/platform/android/index.html) for more information about the changes and new requirements.

Besides Fredia, other contributors also bring some goodies for the platform. First-time contributor [Distantz](https://github.com/Distantz) implemented Android Stylus pressure and tilt support, complementing Apple Pencil support added in Godot 4.0 ([GH-80644](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80644)). You now also have an option to show an icon on Android TV and run your app as a launcher on Android, thanks to [Andrés Botero](https://github.com/0xafbf) ([GH-78164](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78164)).

#### iOS

> In turn, the iOS platform gets some love and parity with Android with the addition of one-click deploy ([GH-70662](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/70662) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)). This feature means you can quickly deploy and remotely debug your project on the actual iOS device or an emulator with all familiar editor tools at your disposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In turn, the iOS platform gets some love and parity with Android with the addition of one-click deploy ([GH-70662](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/70662) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)). This feature means you can quickly deploy and remotely debug your project on an actual iOS device or an emulator with all familiar editor tools at your disposal.
```

### Rendering, particles, and shaders

> For the rendering team the name of the game this time around is "Go big, or go home"! Everyone maintaining Godot's rendering capabilities have something to be proud in this release — [Bastiaan Olij](https://github.com/BastiaanOlij), [bitsawer](https://github.com/bitsawer), [Clay John](https://github.com/clayjohn), [Darío Samo](https://github.com/DarioSamo), [Hugo Locurcio](https://github.com/Calinou), and [Juan Linietsky](https://github.com/reduz) implemented, improved, and fixed a number of big features in just 3 short months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the rendering team the name of the game this time around is "Go big, or go home"! Everyone maintaining Godot's rendering capabilities have something to be proud of in this release — [Bastiaan Olij](https://github.com/BastiaanOlij), [bitsawer](https://github.com/bitsawer), [Clay John](https://github.com/clayjohn), [Darío Samo](https://github.com/DarioSamo), [Hugo Locurcio](https://github.com/Calinou), and [Juan Linietsky](https://github.com/reduz) implemented, improved, and fixed a number of big features in just three short months.
```

It's hard to pick where to start, but performance improvements across the board definitely deserve a mention. Splitting of raster barriers into vertex and fragment components aims to improve performance on mobile devices ([GH-77420](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77420)). Noise textures receive an optimization ([GH-80407](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80407)), and so does the depth prepass ([GH-80070](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80070)). Shader loading and compilation times should see an improvement thanks to ShaderRD compilation groups ([GH-79606](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79606)).

> If you are using compute shaders, a pair of goodies should make your life way more exciting. First, is the newly added ability to create custom texture objects ([GH-79288](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79288)). You can see how it works in practice to create water effects with this [soon-to-be merged compute texture demo](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-demo-projects/pull/938). And another submission adds a set of API to call compute code on the render thread, for cases when you need to synchronize compute shaders and rendering ([GH-79696](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79696)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using compute shaders, a pair of goodies should make your life way more exciting. First is the newly added ability to create custom texture objects ([GH-79288](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79288)). You can see how it works in practice to create water effects with this [soon-to-be merged compute texture demo](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-demo-projects/pull/938). And another submission adds a set of APIs to call compute code on the render thread, for cases when you need to synchronize compute shaders and rendering ([GH-79696](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79696)).
```

> A prominent bug has been fixed, causing a crash if you go over 204 lights, decals, and reflection probes, combined ([GH-80845](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80845)). This issue stopped users from fully flexing the strength of the Forward+ renderer, but now they are free to use up to 512 of each entity type in the default configuration (this limit can be increased). And the built-in glow effect have been improved, making its visuals closer to the high quality look from Godot 3.x ([GH-82353](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82353) by [Raffaele Picca](https://github.com/RPicster)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A prominent bug has been fixed, which caused a crash if you went over 204 lights, decals, and reflection probes, combined ([GH-80845](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80845)). This issue stopped users from fully flexing the strength of the Forward+ renderer, but now they are free to use up to 512 of each entity type in the default configuration (this limit can be increased). And the built-in glow effect has been improved, making its visuals closer to the high quality look from Godot 3.x ([GH-82353](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82353) by [Raffaele Picca](https://github.com/RPicster)).
```

And now, for the big hitters...

#### New features

> Godot 4.2 features support for AMD's <abbr title="FidelityFX Super Resolution">FSR</abbr> 2.2, an open upscaling technique that works on GPUs of all vendors ([GH-81197](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81197)). This is possible thanks to [Darío Samo](https://github.com/DarioSamo), who also implemented a prerequisite support for motion vectors in skeletons, blend shapes, and particles ([GH-80618](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80618), [GH-80688](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80688)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Godot 4.2 features support for AMD's <abbr title="FidelityFX Super Resolution">FSR</abbr> 2.2, an open upscaling technique that works on GPUs of all vendors ([GH-81197](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81197)). This is possible thanks to [Darío Samo](https://github.com/DarioSamo), who also implemented a prerequisite support for motion vectors in skeletons, blend shapes, and particles ([GH-80618](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80618), [GH-80688](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80688)) as well as many issues with the current TAA system that have been plaguing users.
```

> Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser is much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's also significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)). While the quality difference can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking time you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace the old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. Unfortunately, due to build system incompatibilities, we were stuck on an old, single-threaded version of OIDN that is much slower and lower quality than the current version of OIDN. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser is much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's also significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)). While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking time you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that.
```

Author: I'll try to simplify this suggestion a bit, but I agree it's worth mentioning that a better version of OIDN also exists.

> Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser is much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's also significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)). While the quality difference can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking time you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser is much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's also significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)). While the quality difference can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that.
```

The team also worked on addressing multiple bugs in lightmapping quality and consistency ([GH-61910](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/61910), [GH-81545](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81545), [GH-81872](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81872), [GH-81951](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81951), [GH-82533](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82533)).

> For Forward+ and Mobile rendering methods this release introduces 2D HDR rendering, unlocking 3D effects, such as glow, for 2D games ([GH-80215](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80215)). HDR rendering can be used to substantially improve quality of 2D rendering at the cost of performance. The Compatibility renderer also gets a new and anticipated feature — 3D shadows ([GH-77496](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77496)). Both of these changes were crafted by [Clay John](https://github.com/clayjohn).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Forward+ and Mobile rendering methods this release introduces 2D HDR rendering, unlocking 3D effects, such as glow, for 2D games ([GH-80215](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80215)). HDR rendering can be used to substantially improve the quality of 2D rendering at the cost of performance. The Compatibility renderer also gets a new and anticipated feature — 3D shadows ([GH-77496](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77496)). Both of these changes were crafted by [Clay John](https://github.com/clayjohn).
```

Last, but not least, an optional ANGLE-backed OpenGL renderer was added for macOS and Windows ([GH-72831](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/72831)). ANGLE is a compatibility layer for OpenGL on top of Metal and Direct3D 11, which allows us to work around the deprecated and unmaintained OpenGL drivers on macOS, and similarly outdated OpenGL drivers on Windows for some older integrated chipsets. This should increase the portability of Godot games on lower end devices.

#### Particles

> Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion. It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion. It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles. While this is a significant rework, it was done in a way that avoids compatibility breakage, so you should be able to continue using all your current particle effects with no regressions. 
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Importantly, please note that with these changes the GPUParticles and CPUParticles will start to get out of sync. That is to say that we are no longer holding back features from GPUParticles that would be difficult to implement in CPUParticles. Now that all supported backends can support GPUParticles, we view CPUParticles as a low-cost, simplified alternative to GPUParticles, instead of a direct 1-to-1 equivalent implemented on the CPU. 

```

Author: I mention some of this in one for the follow-up paragraphs. I would like to avoid duplicating the same point twice so the piece doesn't bloat too much. Let me know if I can edit the text below to improve this message from your POV!

> Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion. It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of a messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion. It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles.
```

> On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require precise order of operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require precise order of operations.
```

> On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require precise order of operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require a precise order of operations.
```

The CPU particle system exists as a fallback for less capable and less powerful devices, but with modern hardware the need for it is significantly reduced. Specifically for the time when you decide to move to GPU particles, which offer way more functionality, especially with the aforementioned rework, there is now a built-in tool to convert CPU particles to their GPU equivalent ([GH-80779](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80779) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)).

#### Shaders

Visual shaders got some nice improvements with the addition of drop-down list properties to custom nodes ([GH-81688](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81688) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)), and output ports for vector types are now expandable by default ([GH-82088](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82088) by [Dennis Manaa](https://github.com/DennisManaa), their first contribution).

In text shaders, improvements were done to uniform sampler arrays to give them support for more hint types, such as filter modes ([GH-79100](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79100) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)).

### Scripting

> Godot has two main scripting languages, GDScript and C#, and each of them is deserving of special care and attention. That said, the new platform support coming to 4.2 is a very enticing reason to upgrade for C# users specifically!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Godot has two main scripting languages, GDScript and C#, and each of them deserves special care and attention. That said, the new platform support coming to 4.2 is a very enticing reason to upgrade for C# users specifically!
```

> But let's start with a more general change. The script debugger now comes with full support for threaded code ([GH-76582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76582) by [Juan Linietsky](https://github.com/reduz)), including the execution stack and breakpoints. This is something that has been requested since Godot 3 days, and now with better multithreading support of Godot 4 it is finally possible to debug extra threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But let's start with a more general change. The script debugger now comes with full support for threaded code ([GH-76582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76582) by [Juan Linietsky](https://github.com/reduz)), including the execution stack and breakpoints. This is something that has been requested since Godot 3 days, and now with the better multithreading support of Godot 4 it is finally possible to debug extra threads.
```

#### C# / .NET

> Back in March Godot 4.0 was released replacing Mono support in favor of the new .NET framework, which created an unfortunate vacuum when it comes to mobile and web platform support. Godot C#/.NET maintainers had to wait for the new .NET 8.0 to continue their work and expand support to include those platforms. And so the time has come. Godot 4.2 features experimental support for Android (.NET 7.0+ required) and iOS (.NET 8.0 required) export targets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Back in March, Godot 4.0 was released replacing Mono support in favor of the new .NET framework, which created an unfortunate vacuum when it comes to mobile and web platform support. Godot C#/.NET maintainers had to wait for the new .NET 8.0 to continue their work and expand support to include those platforms. And so the time has come. Godot 4.2 features experimental support for Android (.NET 7.0+ required) and iOS (.NET 8.0 required) export targets.
```

Thanks to [RedworkDE](https://github.com/RedworkDE) for [GH-73257](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/73257) and thanks to [Andreia Gaita](https://github.com/shana) for [GH-82729](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82729)!

> There are still some kinks to iron out, some [caveats to consider](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/scripting/c_sharp/index.html#c-platform-support). And of course we rely on public testing to make sure everything works as expected. Until 4.3 this support will remain experimental, and we are still missing the web platform. But we are confident enough that the current state is good to plan ahead if your project is expected to ship to these iOS or Android, so please start testing and report what you find!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are still some kinks to iron out, some [caveats to consider](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/scripting/c_sharp/index.html#c-platform-support). And of course we rely on public testing to make sure everything works as expected. Until 4.3 this support will remain experimental, and we are still missing the web platform. But we are confident that the current state is good enough to plan ahead if your project is expected to ship to iOS or Android, so please start testing and report what you find!
```

> In more general improvements to the C# integration, there is a number of fixes to the binding generator by [Thaddeus Crews](https://github.com/Repiteo) ([GH-80628](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80628), [GH-80630](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80630), [GH-80631](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80631)). Bindings also support abstract classes now ([GH-81101](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81101) by [398utubzyt](https://github.com/398utubzyt)). Interoperability with GDScript has improved thanks to additions by [Zae Chao](https://github.com/zaevi) and [wscalf](https://github.com/wscalf), who contributed support for statis methods and readonly/writeonly properties ([GH-81783](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81783), [GH-67304](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67304)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In more general improvements to the C# integration, there are a number of fixes to the binding generator by [Thaddeus Crews](https://github.com/Repiteo) ([GH-80628](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80628), [GH-80630](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80630), [GH-80631](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80631)). Bindings also support abstract classes now ([GH-81101](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81101) by [398utubzyt](https://github.com/398utubzyt)). Interoperability with GDScript has improved thanks to additions by [Zae Chao](https://github.com/zaevi) and [wscalf](https://github.com/wscalf), who contributed support for static methods and readonly/writeonly properties ([GH-81783](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81783), [GH-67304](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/67304)).
```

> [Raul Santos](https://github.com/raulsntos) put some time into updating the looks of the build panel in the editor ([GH-80260](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80260)), and bringing it to functional parity with the main output log and debugger. He also leveraged GDExtension compatibility API to ensure C# bindings also include the same compatibility methods with little to no intervention from other contributors ([GH-80527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80527)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Raul Santos](https://github.com/raulsntos) put some time into updating the looks of the build panel in the editor ([GH-80260](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80260)), and bringing it to functional parity with the main output log and debugger. He also leveraged the GDExtension compatibility API to ensure C# bindings also include the same compatibility methods with little to no intervention from other contributors ([GH-80527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80527)).
```
Or "GDExtension's compatibility API"?

Author: Probably better like that, yeah.

```suggestion
[Raul Santos](https://github.com/raulsntos) put some time into updating the looks of the build panel in the editor ([GH-80260](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80260)), and bringing it to functional parity with the main output log and debugger. He also leveraged GDExtension's compatibility API to ensure C# bindings also include the same compatibility methods with little to no intervention from other contributors ([GH-80527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80527)).
```

#### GDScript

> GDScript offers the best of both worlds when it comes to typing your variables. You can go completely dynamic, but you can also gradually introduce more and more strict types to your codebase. This is paramount when it comes to iteration speed and turning your prototypes into fleshed out projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GDScript offers the best of both worlds when it comes to typing your variables. You can go completely dynamic, but you can also gradually introduce more and more strict types to your codebase. This is paramount when it comes to iteration speed and turning your prototypes into fleshed-out projects.
```

This release comes with a few additions to empower your statically typed code. Primary among them is the new warning that reports all cases of untyped code so you can make sure your codebase is strict and consistent ([GH-81355](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81355) by [Ryan Brue](https://github.com/ryanabx)). To help you ensure you never trigger this warning, `for` loops now support static typing ([GH-80247](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80247)), and you can use `preload`ed scripts as type hints as well ([GH-80964](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80964)). [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev) has been killing it with fixes and new language features lately!

> Besides typing improvements another bunch of features from [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev) includes raw string literals, or r-strings, ([GH-74995](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/74995)), as well as return type covariance and parameter type contravariance ([GH-82477](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82477)). At the same time [George Marques](https://github.com/vnen) implemented pattern guards for more advanced `match` statements ([GH-80085](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80085)), and he also optimized operator calls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides typing improvements, another bunch of features from [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev) include raw string literals, or r-strings, ([GH-74995](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/74995)), as well as return type covariance and parameter type contravariance ([GH-82477](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82477)). At the same time [George Marques](https://github.com/vnen) implemented pattern guards for more advanced `match` statements ([GH-80085](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80085)), and he also optimized operator calls
```

For projects that require precise normals from contact points of raycasts, the ability to get barycentric coordinates is going to be invaluable ([GH-71233](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/71233)). Whether you want to make an F-Zero-like game, or implement gravity-defying walks on walls, you can thank [PrecisionRender](https://github.com/PrecisionRender) for this new feature. And to help you handle rotation and angles correctly there are now two new global methods, `rotate_toward` and `angle_difference`, courtesy of [etti](https://github.com/ettiSurreal) ([GH-80225](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80225)).

#### Animations

> The animation team is hard at work improving robustness of the animation system, and their biggest contribution to this release by far is an internal rework of both `AnimationPlayer` and `AnimationTree`, unifying parts of their implementation under the new `AnimationMixer` node ([GH-80813](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80813)). This change allows them to address a large number of issues and discrepancies between the two nodes. And I think [Tokage](https://github.com/TokageItLab) has snuck in a couple of features as well, like the new deterministic blending option!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The animation team is hard at work improving robustness of the animation system, and their biggest contribution to this release by far is an internal rework of both `AnimationPlayer` and `AnimationTree`, unifying parts of their implementation under the new `AnimationMixer` node ([GH-80813](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80813)). This change allows them to address a large number of issues and discrepancies between the two nodes. And [Tokage](https://github.com/TokageItLab) has snuck in a couple of features as well, like the new deterministic blending option!
```

Author: I can of course remove first person voice from this, but this sentence doesn't work with just "And Tokage". This whole paragraph refers to Tokage's work, and saying "And Tokage" makes it sound that what he did was adjacent to the previously mentioned PR made by someone else.

A dedicated shoutout to [Rakka Rage](https://github.com/rakkarage) who has been fixing up the tilemap editor since Godot 4.1, and [Thiago Lages de Alencar](https://github.com/thiagola92) who fixed their first bug in this release. They are among many more people making the engine better one contribution at a time ([GH-77316](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77316), [GH-79678](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79678), [GH-80943](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80943), [GH-80968](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80968)).

### Editor and usability

> With every Godot release there are a few hundred changes aimed at improving user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With every Godot release there are a few hundred changes aimed at improving the user experience and fixing usability issues, changing editor tools to better suit most common needs and to get in the way as little as possible.
```

A prominent bug has been fixed, which caused a crash if you went over 204 lights, decals, and reflection probes, combined ([GH-80845](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80845)). This issue stopped users from fully flexing the strength of the Forward+ renderer, but now they are free to use up to 512 of each entity type in the default configuration (this limit can be increased). And the built-in glow effect has been improved, making its visuals closer to the high quality look from Godot 3.x ([GH-82353](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82353) by [Raffaele Picca](https://github.com/RPicster)).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Finally, we changed the vertex layout of meshes significantly in this beta ([GH-81138](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81138)) in two ways:
1. We separated vertex positions from vertex normals and tangents. Previously the layout looked like: "PNTPNTPNT" where P = position, N = normal, and T = tangent. Now the vertex layout is "PPPNTNTNT". This memory layout is more optimal for mobile devices in all situations and can be beneficial on desktop in some situations. 
2. We added a compressed option to the mesh which significantly compresses vertex positions, normals, tangents, and UVs. This reduces bandwidth significantly and can result in performance gains in bandwidth limited scenarios. 
These changes were implemented without breaking compatibility with older meshes as the engine will automatically upgrade older meshes to the newer format. However, the opposite is not true. Meshes that have been imported in beta 1 or later cannot be used in older version of Godot without re-importing. This means that once you have re-imported a mesh in a version after and including this beta, you can no longer use that mesh in a previous version of Godot without re-importing the mesh. 

```

#### Particles

Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of a messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion.

It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles. While this is a significant rework, it was done in a way that avoids compatibility breakage, so you should be able to continue using all your current particle effects with no regressions.

On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require a precise order of operations.

> The CPU particle system exists as a fallback for less capable and less powerful devices, but with modern hardware the need for it is significantly reduced. Specifically for the time when you decide to move to GPU particles, which offer way more functionality, especially with the aforementioned rework, there is now a built-in tool to convert CPU particles to their GPU equivalent ([GH-80779](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80779) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Importantly, please note that with these changes the GPUParticles and CPUParticles will start to get out of sync. That is to say that we are no longer holding back features from GPUParticles that would be difficult to implement in CPUParticles. Now that all supported backends can support GPUParticles, we view CPUParticles as a low-cost, simplified alternative to GPUParticles, instead of a direct 1-to-1 equivalent implemented on the CPU for older devices. We encourage users to move towards using GPUParticles. To aid in that transition there is now a built-in tool to convert CPU particles to their GPU equivalent ([GH-80779](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80779) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)).
```

This means, _it's beta testing time,_ and you are invited to offer your hand in squashing bugs and identifying usability issues. Help us make sure that in Godot 4.2 there are no crashes or unexpected regressions, and that performance is no worse (but preferably better) than before. Godot is developed by its community, and it's thanks to people like you we can be sure in the quality of our collective work!

Please, consider [supporting the project financially](#support), if you are able. Godot is maintained by the efforts of volunteers and your donations go towards sponsoring their work and ensuring they can dedicate their undivided attention to the needs of the project.

[Jump to the **Downloads** section](#downloads), and give it a spin right now, or continue reading to learn more about improvements in this release. You can also [try the **Web editor**](https://editor.godotengine.org/releases/4.2.beta1/) or the **Android editor** for this release. If you are interested in the latter, please request to join [our testing group](https://groups.google.com/g/godot-testers) to get access to pre-release builds.

-----

> *The illustration picture in this article is taken from the* [**Lush Jungle**](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo), *a Godot 4 demo scene created by [Wrobot](https://wrobot.nl.eu.org/). You can look at their beautify jungle vistas in [this showcase video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MM_caxjlNao), or try the demo for yourself by downloading it from [itch.io](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo). And consider following Wrobot on social networks ([Twitter](https://twitter.com/wrobot123), [Mastodon](https://mastodon.gamedev.place/@Wrobot)) to make sure you don't miss any of their future work!*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*The illustration picture in this article is taken from the* [**Lush Jungle**](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo), *a Godot 4 demo scene created by [Wrobot](https://wrobot.nl.eu.org/). You can look at their beautiful jungle vistas in [this showcase video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MM_caxjlNao), or try the demo for yourself by downloading it from [itch.io](https://wrobot.itch.io/jungledemo). And consider following Wrobot on social networks ([Twitter](https://twitter.com/wrobot123), [Mastodon](https://mastodon.gamedev.place/@Wrobot)) to make sure you don't miss any of their future work!*
```

- An optimization that required splitting raster barriers into vertex and fragment components changes relevant enumerations ([GH-77420](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77420)). It's unlikely that this affects your project, unless you rely on specific numeric values and store them somewhere.
- Renaming an audio bus no longer emits the `bus_layout_changed` signal in `AudioServer`; use the new `bus_renamed` signal ([GH-81641](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81641)).
- Default base part of the Android package name was changed from `org.godotengine` to `com.example` ([GH-80761](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80761)).

### Core and systems

Following the big changes to resource loading and multithreading done in Godot 4.1, the core team is more focused on stability this time around.

> This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. Also, sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)) should no longer occur. There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.

Reviewer 3: AFAIK, there's more cases being debugged now that will need to be fixed properly.
```suggestion
This includes addressing design limitations when changing scenes or renaming nodes during `ready`, which led to crashes ([GH-78988](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78988), [GH-78706](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78706)), as well as various problems related to renaming and moving files around ([GH-80503](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80503), [GH-81657](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81657)). The latter could also lead to corruption of scene files, which should no longer occur. Also, some cases of sporadic changing of resources IDs in scenes ([GH-65011](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/65011)) have been solved. There is still room for improvement, but this already makes 4.2 way more version control friendly.
```

#### 3D viewport and tools

In Godot 4.0 [Ryan Roden-Corrent](https://github.com/rcorre) added convenient hotkeys to the 3D viewport which any Blender user would find familiar. Blender-style transforms, using keys like `G`, `R`, or `S`, are now improved with support for numeric inputs for each operation, and mouse wrapping ([GH-58389](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/58389), [GH-59467](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/59467)).

If you rely more on on-screen gizmos, you will love this next feature developed by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi). As you probably know, box collision shapes are defined as a center point and symmetrical extents, which has long limited how they can be edited. But no longer, as each side can now be extended individually within the editor viewport ([GH-71092](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/71092)).

> While in the 3D viewport, you may notice that it contains less clutter as various auxiliary visual information is only displayed for selected objects ([GH-75303](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75303)). At the same time elements like decals and fog volumes now have extra indicators which make them easier to select via the viewport ([GH-81554](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81554)). Both of these changes were submitted by [Hugo Locurcio](https://github.com/Calinou).

Reviewer 3: Not a big deal, but "various [...] information is" sounds weird to me. After "various" I would expect a plural, but information is singular.

Author: ```suggestion
While in the 3D viewport, you may notice that it contains less clutter as some auxiliary visual information is only displayed for selected objects ([GH-75303](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75303)). At the same time elements like decals and fog volumes now have extra indicators which make them easier to select via the viewport ([GH-81554](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81554)). Both of these changes were submitted by [Hugo Locurcio](https://github.com/Calinou).
```

Reviewer: I think it would read OK if the word "various" is removed..?

> ![The results of decluttering of the 3D viewport](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/3d-viewport-decluttering.webp)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![The results of decluttering the 3D viewport](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/3d-viewport-decluttering.webp)
```

Reviewer 3: Or "The results of the decluttering of the 3D viewport" but that's a lot of the of the's.

#### Docks and resource editors

A lot of love was poured into the inspector and signal docks by [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev), with improvements to context menus and on-hover documentation for types and their properties ([GH-80411](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80411), [GH-81092](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81092), [GH-81221](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81221)). Property descriptions are also now available in the theme editor ([GH-81284](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81284) by [Michael Alexsander](https://github.com/YeldhamDev)). The filesystem dock didn't want to feel left behind, so it received a highly requested organizational feature. You can now assign colors to various folders to help you navigate your project more intuitively, thanks to [Lucian](https://github.com/the-sink) ([GH-80440](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80440)).

> Back to the inspector, a couple of its existing features received an update. When making resources unique you now have fine-grained control over which sub-resources should follow suit, and which should be left as is ([GH-77855](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77855) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)). [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) does more than icons, and for Godot 4.2 they looked into making the Gradient resource editor more intuitive, adding snapping and improving the UI  ([GH-71915](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/71915)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Back to the inspector, a couple of its existing features received an update. When making resources unique you now have fine-grained control over which sub-resources should follow suit, and which should be left as is ([GH-77855](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77855) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)). [MewPurPur](https://github.com/MewPurPur) does more than icons, and for Godot 4.2 they looked into making the Gradient resource editor more intuitive, adding snapping and improving the UI ([GH-71915](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/71915)).
```

#### Project manager

The project manager is the first thing that users see when they begin their Godot journey, and as such it is both in a constant need to be improved and must be treated with care. As a result of that dilemma, the work submitted by [starry-abyss](https://github.com/starry-abyss) two years ago only now becomes available with the upcoming release of Godot 4.2.

They've looked into the UX of the project manager and decided to improve the general arrangement of key controls, as well as the project import workflow ([GH-50674](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/50674), [GH-51478](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/51478)). Make sure to give us your feedback on these changes!

![A look at the updated layout of the project manager](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/project-manager-layout.webp)

#### Editor plugins

In more technical news, the editor-specific scripting API, relevant for plugins and tool scripts, has seen a few changes.

> A lot of editor functionality is exposed, directly or indirectly, via the `EditorInterface` class. It exists as a single instance, however in previous versions of Godot accessing it involved getting a reference through `EditorPlugin` or `EditorScript`. In case of tool scripts this meant using hacks creating useless instances of either class just to get the access. Now, `EditorInterface` is just a singleton, available only in the editor ([GH-75694](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75694) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)).

Reviewer 3: Avoids redundancy with the previous sentence.
```suggestion
A lot of editor functionality is exposed, directly or indirectly, via the `EditorInterface` class. It exists as a single instance, however in previous versions of Godot accessing it involved getting a reference through `EditorPlugin` or `EditorScript`. In case of tool scripts this meant using hacks creating useless instances of either class just to get the access. Now, `EditorInterface` is a singleton, available only in the editor ([GH-75694](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/75694) by [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov)).
```

This release also contains a major and long-awaited improvement to the development workflow of extensions. After some initial work by [George Marques](https://github.com/vnen) ([GH-80188](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80188)), [David Snopek](https://github.com/dsnopek) was able to implement in-editor hot reloading ([GH-80284](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80284))! Where previously an editor restart was required to pick up on the changes in a GDExtension library, updates can now be handled on the fly. This change also makes C++ scripting with extensions a more viable tool.

> In other big news, dynamic libraries can now be loaded on the Web platform, which means GDExtensions can be used with web exports ([GH-82633](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82633)). Thanks to [Fabio Alessandrelli](https://github.com/Faless) for his outstanding work!

Reviewer 3: There are still a few quirks, but there's good work being made on debugging and solving them, so it might be fine not to mention them. This statement should become fully accurate in future betas.

Author: I would rather mention it and add your first sentence as an extra clause :)

### GUI and theming

The first set of notable UI system changes focuses on... well, on focus management. Thanks to a contribution by [DrRevert](https://github.com/DrRevert), individual tabs of `TabBar`/`TabContainer` can now receive focus, including keyboard navigation and dedicated styling ([GH-79104](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79104)). Speaking of navigation, a new method available for all `Control` nodes allows you to find the next valid focus neighbor in any direction, which is useful when implementing custom traversal logic ([GH-76027](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76027) by [AThousandShips](https://github.com/AThousandShips)).

Next up is the big rework of graph-building nodes. Marked as experimental starting with Godot 4.0, `GraphEdit` and `GraphNode` have been cleaned up and reorganized, splitting node functionality into several different types. This allows developers to define completely custom graph nodes without most of the predefined behavior. This rework also made the title bar of each graph node more customizable, while temporarily removing comment nodes which need a little bit more time in the oven.

> The rework has been carried by [Hendrik Brucker](https://github.com/Geometror) throughout a series of pull-requests ([GH-79307](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79307), [GH-79308](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79308), [GH-79311](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79311)) with a bit of help from myself, [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov). I also made further changes to make the toolbar of the main `GraphEdit` node more customizable ([GH-81582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81582)). We want to make sure that all feedback from `GraphEdit` users is accounted for, and for this reason the node will remain marked as experimental for the time being.

Reviewer 3: We don't usually style this with a hyphen.
```suggestion
The rework has been carried by [Hendrik Brucker](https://github.com/Geometror) throughout a series of pull requests ([GH-79307](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79307), [GH-79308](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79308), [GH-79311](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79311)) with a bit of help from myself, [Yuri Sizov](https://github.com/YuriSizov). I also made further changes to make the toolbar of the main `GraphEdit` node more customizable ([GH-81582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81582)). We want to make sure that all feedback from `GraphEdit` users is accounted for, and for this reason the node will remain marked as experimental for the time being.
```

And now, for the big hitters...

#### New features

Godot 4.2 features support for AMD's <abbr title="FidelityFX Super Resolution">FSR</abbr> 2.2, an open upscaling technique that works on GPUs of all vendors ([GH-81197](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81197)). This is possible thanks to [Darío Samo](https://github.com/DarioSamo), who also implemented a prerequisite support for motion vectors in skeletons, blend shapes, and particles ([GH-80618](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80618), [GH-80688](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80688)), and also solved many issues with the current <abbr title="Temporal anti-aliasing">TAA</abbr> system that have been plaguing users.

> Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace the old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. Although a newer and improved version of OIDN is available, we were unfortunately stuck with an older one due to technical incompatibilities. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser avoids similar issues. It is also much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)). While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that.

Reviewer 4: Since https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832 was merged, it probably should be mentioned that new versions of OIDN are usable as external tool.

In text shaders, improvements were done to uniform sampler arrays to give them support for more hint types, such as filter modes ([GH-79100](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79100) by [Tomasz Chabora](https://github.com/KoBeWi)).

### Scripting

Godot has two main scripting languages, GDScript and C#, and each of them deserves special care and attention. That said, the new platform support coming to 4.2 is a very enticing reason to upgrade for C# users specifically!

But let's start with a more general change. The script debugger now comes with full support for threaded code ([GH-76582](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76582) by [Juan Linietsky](https://github.com/reduz)), including the execution stack and breakpoints. This is something that has been requested since Godot 3 days, and now with the better multithreading support of Godot 4 it is finally possible to debug extra threads.

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline title="A demo of new threading capabilities in the script debugger">
  <source src="/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/threaded-debugger.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

#### C# / .NET

> Back in March, Godot 4.0 was released replacing Mono support in favor of the new .NET framework, which created an unfortunate vacuum when it comes to mobile and web platform support. Godot C#/.NET maintainers had to wait for the new .NET 8.0 to continue their work and expand support to include those platforms. And so the time has come. Godot 4.2 features experimental support for Android (.NET 7.0+ required) and iOS (.NET 8.0 required) export targets.

Reviewer 5: I'm a bit worried that users may misunderstand this part because:
- Saying "replacing Mono support" may give users the impression that we are not using Mono at all. We did get rid of the Mono embedding APIs, but we may still use the Mono runtime when appropriate (mobile and web platforms).
- The name ".NET framework" may be confused with ".NET Framework" (noticed the uppercase **F**) which refers to the old Windows-only implementation. Perhaps this part could be replaced with just ".NET"?

Author: If we use Mono in future, it will be reintroduced then. I don't think it's incorrect to say that we've replaced it in 4.0.

Yeah, I am slightly concerned about ".NET framework", but saying "in favor of the new .NET" or just "in favor of .NET" doesn't sound good to me either. Ultimately, even if some would be confused by it, it shouldn't cause any problems. But I can use some other generic term, if you have suggestions (e.g. ".NET library" or something like that).

Reviewer 5: > If we use Mono in future, it will be reintroduced then.

Well, we are using the Mono runtime in our experimental export for Android and iOS, that's why I was saying it. But it's probably fine.

> But I can use some other generic term, if you have suggestions

I mean the word framework is not incorrect, maybe we could say ".NET Core framework" since that's technically what it is (even though Microsoft dropped the "Core" part of the name in .NET 5.0).

Author: Yeah, I didn't use Core because they renamed it again. It's a hot mess :D 

> Well, we are using the Mono runtime in our experimental export for Android and iOS, that's why I was saying it. But it's probably fine.

That sentence is about 4.0 though. I can mention that Android support already reintroduces Mono, if you want!

Author: I reworked the sentence a bit to address both issues. Will push soon.

Thanks to [RedworkDE](https://github.com/RedworkDE) for [GH-73257](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/73257) and thanks to [Andreia Gaita](https://github.com/shana) for [GH-82729](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82729)!

> There are still some kinks to iron out, some [caveats to consider](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/scripting/c_sharp/index.html#c-platform-support). And of course we rely on public testing to make sure everything works as expected. Until 4.3 this support will remain experimental, and we are still missing the web platform. But we are confident that the current state is good enough to plan ahead if your project is expected to ship to iOS or Android, so please start testing and report what you find!

Reviewer 5: I feel like this sounds as if we're saying this will become stable in 4.3, but I don't think we can promise that.

The current iOS export relies on .NET 8 NativeAOT which is documented by Microsoft as experimental for this platform, so we probably should wait until they mark their stuff as stable to do the same thing ourselves.

However, we wanted to bring back some of the Mono embedding so if we can get that in time for 4.3 we may be able to remove the experimental label.

Author: It doesn't just sound like it, that's exactly what I wrote :) But if you think we can't commit to removing the experimental label in 4.3, I can rephrase it. Up to you!

Reviewer 5: I'd prefer to rephrase it so it doesn't sound so certain. I think in 4.3 we can remove the experimental label for Android, but iOS I don't know.

[Raul Santos](https://github.com/raulsntos) put some time into updating the looks of the build panel in the editor ([GH-80260](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80260)), and bringing it to functional parity with the main output log and debugger. He also leveraged GDExtension's compatibility API to ensure C# bindings also include the same compatibility methods with little to no intervention from other contributors ([GH-80527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80527)).

#### GDScript

GDScript offers the best of both worlds when it comes to typing your variables. You can go completely dynamic, but you can also gradually introduce more and more strict types to your codebase. This is paramount when it comes to iteration speed and turning your prototypes into fleshed-out projects.

> This release comes with a few additions to empower your statically typed code. Primary among them is the new warning that reports all cases of untyped code so you can make sure your codebase is strict and consistent ([GH-81355](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81355) by [Ryan Brue](https://github.com/ryanabx)). To help you ensure you never trigger this warning, `for` loops now support static typing ([GH-80247](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80247)), and you can use `preload`ed scripts as type hints as well ([GH-80964](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80964)). [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev) has been killing it with fixes and new language features lately!

Reviewer 6: Member constants supported this before, the change is that now local constants support this too. Not only a `preload`ed script is considered a type, but also any other type (class or enum).

> Besides typing improvements, another bunch of features from [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev) include raw string literals, or r-strings, ([GH-74995](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/74995)), as well as return type covariance and parameter type contravariance ([GH-82477](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82477)). At the same time [George Marques](https://github.com/vnen) implemented pattern guards for more advanced `match` statements ([GH-80085](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80085)), and he also optimized operator calls

Reviewer 6: Covariance and contravariance can also be counted as typing improvements.

Author: Right. I don't think it's a big deal in this case, and we want paragraphs to be about the same length for a better flow. So I'm going to keep it as is.

([GH-79990](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79990)).

> Regular and documentation comments are seeing some upgrades as well. Special TODO markers (such as `TODO`, `FIXME`, etc) are now highlighted in the code editor to better grab your attention ([GH-79761](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79761)). You can configure both keywords and colors that are given to them in the editor settings. Documentation comments now support `@deprecated` and `@experimental` tags to mark properties and methods accordingly in the generated documentation ([GH-78941](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78941)). Documentation generation itself has also been improved ([GH-80745](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80745)). All these changes were submitted by, once again, [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Regular and documentation comments are seeing some upgrades as well. Special TODO markers (such as `TODO`, `FIXME`, etc) are now highlighted in the code editor to better grab your attention ([GH-79761](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79761)). You can configure both keywords and colors that are given to them in the editor settings. Documentation comments now support `@deprecated` and `@experimental` tags to mark class members accordingly in the generated documentation ([GH-78941](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78941)). Documentation generation itself has also been improved ([GH-80745](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80745)). All these changes were submitted by, once again, [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev).
```

Please make sure to test these changes and provide feedback to our Android platform maintainers who want to ensure a smooth migration process. You can refer to the [updated platform documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/latest/tutorials/platform/android/index.html) for more information about the changes and new requirements.

Besides Fredia, other contributors also bring some goodies for the platform. First-time contributor [Distantz](https://github.com/Distantz) implemented Android Stylus pressure and tilt support, complementing Apple Pencil support added in Godot 4.0 ([GH-80644](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80644)). You now also have an option to show an icon on Android TV and run your app as a launcher on Android, thanks to [Andrés Botero](https://github.com/0xafbf) ([GH-78164](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78164)).

#### iOS

> In turn, the iOS platform gets some love and parity with Android with the addition of one-click deploy ([GH-70662](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/70662) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)). This feature means you can quickly deploy and remotely debug your project on an actual iOS device or an emulator with all familiar editor tools at your disposal.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In turn, the iOS platform gets some love and parity with Android with the addition of one-click deploy ([GH-70662](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/70662) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)). This feature means you can quickly deploy and remotely debug your project on an actual iOS device or an emulator with all the familiar editor tools at your disposal.
```

Darío also implemented a new lightmapper denoising approach to replace the old, extremely bulky and slow <abbr title="OpenImage Denoise">OIDN</abbr> denoiser. Although a newer and improved version of OIDN is available, we were unfortunately stuck with an older one due to technical incompatibilities. The new <abbr title="Joint Non-Local Means">JNLM</abbr> denoiser avoids similar issues. It is also much faster as it utilizes compute shaders (and thus your GPU), and it's significantly more lightweight ([GH-81659](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81659)).

> While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that. If you would prefer to use OIDN, this is still possible by configuring the editor to use an external OIDN executable ([GH-82832](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)).

Reviewer 3: For the first sentence, I'd like to avoid the issue I created in the last post where users assumed that JNLM would necessarily reduce quality. After feedback from Dario I changed the sentences there to:

> Differences in denoising quality are likely to show up with the JNLM approach, sometimes for better or worse. While it lacks an AI component, it can leverage the albedo and normal information to fix errors that were impossible to address with OIDN.

Maybe we can tweak the paragraph here to include some of that? I'm mostly concerned about saying "the quality decrease" as if it's a given.

> While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that. If you would prefer to use OIDN, this is still possible by configuring the editor to use an external OIDN executable ([GH-82832](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that. If you would prefer to use OIDN, this is still possible by configuring the editor to use an external OIDN executable, giving access to the latest versions with support for GPU denoising ([GH-82832](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)).
```

> While the quality decrease can be noticeable under some circumstances, thanks to drastically reduced baking times, you can now use higher resolution maps to counteract that. If you would prefer to use OIDN, this is still possible by configuring the editor to use an external OIDN executable, giving access to the latest versions with support for GPU denoising ([GH-82832](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the quality may decrease in some situations (and increase in others), you can use higher quality options to increase the overall quality thanks to drastically reduced denoise times. If you would prefer to use OIDN, this is still possible by configuring the editor to use an external OIDN executable, giving access to the latest versions with support for GPU denoising ([GH-82832](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82832) by [Pāvels Nadtočajevs](https://github.com/bruvzg)).
```

![The result of using the new JNLM denoiser](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/jnlm-denoiser.webp)

The team also worked on addressing multiple bugs in lightmapping quality and consistency ([GH-61910](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/61910), [GH-81545](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81545), [GH-81872](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81872), [GH-81951](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81951), [GH-82533](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82533)).

For Forward+ and Mobile rendering methods this release introduces 2D HDR rendering, unlocking 3D effects, such as glow, for 2D games ([GH-80215](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80215)). HDR rendering can be used to substantially improve the quality of 2D rendering at the cost of performance. The Compatibility renderer also gets a new and anticipated feature — 3D shadows ([GH-77496](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/77496)). Both of these changes were crafted by [Clay John](https://github.com/clayjohn).

> Last, but not least, an optional ANGLE-backed OpenGL renderer was added for macOS and Windows ([GH-72831](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/72831)). ANGLE is a compatibility layer for OpenGL on top of Metal and Direct3D 11, which allows us to work around the deprecated and unmaintained OpenGL drivers on macOS, and similarly outdated OpenGL drivers on Windows for some older integrated chipsets. This should increase the portability of Godot games on lower end devices.

Reviewer 3: "renderer" sounds too me like it would be a fully separate reimplementation of `drivers/gles3`, when AFAIK it's just a layer on top of it.
```suggestion
Last, but not least, an optional ANGLE-backed OpenGL rendering driver was added for macOS and Windows ([GH-72831](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/72831)). ANGLE is a compatibility layer for OpenGL on top of Metal and Direct3D 11, which allows us to work around the deprecated and unmaintained OpenGL drivers on macOS, and similarly outdated OpenGL drivers on Windows for some older integrated chipsets. This should increase the portability of Godot games on lower end devices.
```

#### Particles

Our brilliant VFX champion [Ilaria Cislaghi](https://github.com/QbieShay) grew tired of a messy implementation of GPU particles and organized a rework aimed at improving internal structures for better maintenance ([GH-79527](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79527)). Along the way, she also tweaked all sorts of bits and bobs to give VFX artists more control over particle motion.

> It's now possible to directly animate velocity over life, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles. While this is a significant rework, it was done in a way that avoids compatibility breakage, so you should be able to continue using all your current particle effects with no regressions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It's now possible to directly animate velocity over lifetime, inherit projectile velocity, and change the emission amount of particles. While this is a significant rework, it was done in a way that avoids compatibility breakage, so you should be able to continue using all your current particle effects with no regressions.
```

On the more technical side of things, both GPU and CPU particles now have a dedicated signal for when they are finished with emission and simulation ([GH-76853](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76853), [GH-76859](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/76859) by [HolonProduction](https://github.com/HolonProduction)). This can be extremely useful for animations that require a precise order of operations.

> Please note, that the aforementioned changes to GPU particles mark the point where they start to deviate from CPU particles. This means that in the future more GPU-only features are going to be implemented, leaving CPU particles as a low-cost, simplified alternative, and not a direct 1-to-1 equivalent. GPU particles are supported by all rendering backends in Godot 4, and we encourage users to move towards using them. To aid in that transition, there is now a built-in tool to convert CPU particles to their GPU equivalent ([GH-80779](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80779) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Please note that the aforementioned changes to GPU particles mark the point where they start to deviate from CPU particles. This means that in the future more GPU-only features are going to be implemented, leaving CPU particles as a low-cost, simplified alternative, and not a direct 1-to-1 equivalent. GPU particles are supported by all rendering backends in Godot 4, and we encourage users to move towards using them. To aid in that transition, there is now a built-in tool to convert CPU particles to their GPU equivalent ([GH-80779](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80779) by [Yuri Rubinsky](https://github.com/Chaosus)).
```

([GH-79990](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79990)).

Regular and documentation comments are seeing some upgrades as well. Special TODO markers (such as `TODO`, `FIXME`, etc) are now highlighted in the code editor to better grab your attention ([GH-79761](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/79761)). You can configure both keywords and colors that are given to them in the editor settings. Documentation comments now support `@deprecated` and `@experimental` tags to mark class members accordingly in the generated documentation ([GH-78941](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/78941)). Documentation generation itself has also been improved ([GH-80745](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80745)). All these changes were submitted by, once again, [Danil Alexeev](https://github.com/dalexeev).

![TODO and FIXME comments highlighted in the code editor](/storage/blog/godot-4-2-beta/todo-highlighting.webp)

> To close things off for GDScript, a contribution from [Ryan Brue](https://github.com/ryanabx) improves hovered symbol resolution, fixes various bugs related to renaming, and implements reference lookup, all in one go ([GH-80973](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/80973)). Ryan also added a new command line argument, `--lsp-port` which is useful for authors of LSP plugins to support both Godot 3.x and 4.x, as well as multiple editor instances ([GH-81844](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/81844)).

Reviewer 3: PR 80973 is specific to the LSP, so for external editors only. That might be worth clarifying as the first sentence sounds like there's now a reference lookup method in the builtin editor.

Author: Ah yes, I forgot to frame this paragraph and say that it's about LSP!

On top of that, a significant contribution from [konczg](https://github.com/konczg) opens up the OpenXR module to be extended and interacted with from the GDExtension API ([GH-68259](https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/68259)). We can't wait for your projects utilizing this capability to its fullest!

-----

## Downloads

The downloads for this pre-release build can be found in our GitHub repository:

* [**Download Godot 4.2 beta 1**](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-builds/releases/tag/4.2-beta1).

**Standard build** includes support for GDScript and GDExtension.

**.NET build** (marked as `mono`) includes support for C#, as well as GDScript and GDExtension.
- .NET build requires [.NET SDK 6.0](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/6.0) or [7.0](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/7.0) installed in a standard location.

> - To export to Android, .NET 7.0 is required. To export to iOS, .NET 8.0 is required. Make sure to set the target framework in the `.csproj` file.

Reviewer 3: I think for iOS the target framework is set automatically. Not sure about Android. Can you confirm @raulsntos?
```suggestion
- To export to Android, .NET 7.0 or later is required. To export to iOS, .NET 8.0 is required. Make sure to set the target framework in the `.csproj` file.
```

Author: I pushed the suggestion, but keeping this unresolved so Raul doesn't miss the message :)

Reviewer 5: The right target is set for newly created projects (both Android and iOS). For existing projects, the user needs to edit the `.csproj` manually.

We were thinking about updating the `.csproj` automatically (see https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/82927) but automatically editing the `.csproj` is risky so I don't think this will be merged for 4.2.

Reviewer 3: I saw the WIP documentation PR, it seems like we're adding it for new projects (with conditionals), but not for existing projects. So it makes sense to call it out here.
